
In Java, threads don’t always read and write variables directly from **main memory**. Instead, each thread can cache values of variables in its own **working memory** (like CPU registers or local caches) to improve performance. This means that if one thread modifies a shared variable, that update may **stay in its local cache** temporarily and **not be written back to main memory** right away.

As a result, other threads may continue reading **stale or outdated values** from their own caches because they have **no way of knowing** that the value was updated by another thread.

We can use the `synchronized` keyword to enforce visibility. When a thread enters a `synchronized` block or method, it **refreshes its working memory** with the latest values from **main memory**. Similarly, when a thread exits a synchronized block, **all changes it made to shared variables are flushed back to main memory**. This ensures that any updates made by one thread are **visible to other threads** that subsequently enter synchronized blocks guarded by the same monitor.

However, this comes at a cost. Consider the following code:

```
private boolean done;  

public synchronized boolean isDone() {     
	return done; 
}
```

In this example, the `isDone()` method simply reads the `done` flag. However, because it's declared `synchronized`, any thread calling it must first acquire the object's intrinsic lock. This introduces unnecessary **blocking** and **lock contention**, especially <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">when multiple threads are trying to read concurrently</span>.

The overhead of acquiring and releasing a lock just to read a value can degrade performance.

We can use the `volatile` keyword to ensure **visibility** of shared variables between threads without the overhead of synchronization. 

Declaring a variable as `volatile` tells the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) that **reads and writes to this variable must always go directly to and from main memory**. This means that when one thread updates a `volatile`variable, the new value is immediately visible to all other threads that subsequently read it. 

```
private volatile boolean done;  

public boolean isDone() {     
	return done; 
}
```

> **NOTE:** Unlike `synchronized`, `volatile` does **not provide mutual exclusion**, i.e., multiple threads can access the variable **at the same time**. Since, it doesn't prevent race conditions, it's not suitable for compound actions like `check-then-act`.

<span style="color:green; font-weight:bold;">Summary</span>

`volatile` is good for **single read / write operations**, like setting a flag (`done`, `running`, `cancelled`).

---

