
Java allows you to create and launch **separate threads** of execution via the `java.lang.Thread` class and the `Runnable` interface. 

> **NOTE:** Each thread has its **own call stack** that allows it to run concurrently with the main thread.

---
### Extending the Thread Class

The `Thread` class represents an **actual thread of execution** and comes with built-in responsibilities such as managing the thread's **lifecycle**, handling **thread state transitions**, and providing methods like `start()`, `sleep()`, `join()`, `interrupt()`, etc.

You can create your own thread by **extending the `Thread` class** and **overriding its `run()` method**, which contains the code that the thread will execute.

**Example**

```
class MyThread extends Thread {
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Thread is running");
    }
}

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        MyThread t1 = new MyThread();
        t1.start(); // create a new call stack and run the thread asynchronously
    }
}
```

**Limitations**

Extending `Thread` **couples task logic with thread control**, which reduces reusability. It also **prevents inheritance from other classes**, limiting flexibility.

You should extend the `Thread` class only when you want to **customise the thread itself**, not just the task it executes. For example, if you want to override methods like `start()` or `interrupt()`.

---
### Implementing the Runnable Interface

`Runnable` is a **functional interface**, i.e., it has just one method: `run()`. It represents a **task that can be executed by a thread**, but it doesn't actually create the thread itself.

By implementing `Runnable`, you define the **logic you want to run in a separate thread**, and then you pass it to a `Thread`object to start execution.

**Example**

```
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Runnable task = () -> System.out.println("Custom task logic");
		new Thread(task).start();
    }
}
```

> **NOTE:** You implement `Runnable` to define **what** to do, and you use `Thread` to define **when/how** it runs.

---

<span style="color:red;font-weight:bold;">Q. What will be the output of the following code snippet?</span>

```
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Thread t = new Thread(() -> {
            System.out.println("Thread is running");
        });

        t.start();
        t.start(); // Second call to start()
    }
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold">Output</span>

```
Thread is running
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.IllegalThreadStateException
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold">Explanation</span> 

Java threads are **single-use objects**. Once a `Thread` has started, you **cannot restart it**. 

Internally, the `Thread` class checks its state, and if it has already been started, it throws `java.lang.IllegalThreadStateException`. 

---
