
The `useEffect` hook allows you to run code (`Effects`) **after the component renders**, making it ideal for **synchronising your component with external systems** like APIs or third-party libraries.

```
import { useState, useEffect } from 'react';  

import { createConnection } from './chat.js';  

function ChatRoom({ roomId }) {

	const [serverUrl, setServerUrl] = useState('https://localhost:1234');  

	useEffect(() => {  
		const connection = createConnection(serverUrl, roomId);  
		connection.connect();  
		return () => {  
			connection.disconnect();  
		};  
	}, [serverUrl, roomId]);  

	// ...  

}
```

The first argument to `useEffect` is a function where you **perform your side effect**. This function can **return another function**, which will be **used for cleanup.**

The second argument is an optional array of dependencies. <strong><span style="color: red; background: #FFF1E8">The effect runs whenever one of these dependencies changes. If you omit the array, the effect runs after every render. If you provide an empty array, the effect runs only once.</span></strong>

> **NOTE:** The `useEffect` hook is executed **only in the browser**, **after the component has been painted on the screen** (i.e., in the **commit phase**).

---

**Q. What is the difference between `useEffect` and event handlers?**

<strong><span style="color: red">Effects describe side effects caused by rendering, not from user-triggered events.</span></strong> For example, sending a message in the chat is an event because it is directly caused by the user clicking a specific button. However, setting up a server connection is an Effect because it should happen no matter which interaction caused the component to appear.

---

Q. **When does `useEffect` run?**

Effects run at the end of a commit after the screen updates. This is a good time to synchronise the React components with some external system.

---

