---

---

View (UI): consists of four main parts:

- ﻿﻿Main Screen. Here, we show popular songs, artists and albums. Also, we show content related to user, based on their interests.
- ﻿﻿Artist's screen. Here, user can find information about artist, list of albums, songs etc.
- ﻿﻿Search screen. On this screen, users can search by song's name, artist or album. We will show most relevant result at the top of the page, and other result separated by categories.
- ﻿﻿Player. Playing music.


---
### Functional Requirement

- Main Page
- Text Input

---
### Data Flow

---
### Distribution

CDN??

---
## Rendering Methods - CSR vs SSR vs hydration

---
### Pagination


---
### EXTRA

For UI components, we need to primarily focus on internal state of different components and their input parameters. 

loC (Inversion of Control) is a design principle in which a software component is designed to receive its dependencies from an external source, rather than creating them itself.

**Accessibility**

- ﻿﻿Semantic tags. A major recommendation for accessibility is to use semantic tags whenever possible. Semantic tags are header, main, button, h1, h2, etc. This is also useful for SEO.

Performance

Network

- ﻿﻿Data compression. Use Brotli for text formats such as HTML, CSS, JS, and Gzip for binary files.
- ﻿﻿Use the latest version of protocols (НТТР 2.0).
- ﻿﻿Use SSR whenever possible
- ﻿﻿Asset caching
- ﻿﻿Retrieve only the minimum required field sets through the GraphQL API
- ﻿﻿Pre-loading data. For example, when the user hovers the mouse over the "Next" button, we can immediately start loading the next piece of data.
- ﻿﻿Lazy loading of non-critical assets. For example, assets for popups, ADS and trackers are not required for initial loading.

Images

• Use lazy loading

- ﻿﻿Use modern image formats (WebP + PNG)
- ﻿﻿Load the appropriate image for each screen via the sreset and picture attribute.

Video

• Use adaptive bitrate streaming to adapt video quality to the user's connection

• Sse WeM instead of

GIF for promo videos. It has smaller size and better quality.

CSS

- ﻿﻿Prefer composition only CSS animations.
- ﻿﻿Use a naming convention such as

BEM. Avoid using second or more levels of selectors (only the first level is high-performance)

JavaScript

- ﻿﻿Maintain a small
- ﻿﻿Use efficient algorithms for computations (avoid

Workers/Backend.