
React is a JavaScript library for building user interfaces (UIs) for web applications. It was built by Facebook to address the challenges of building complex and interactive user interfaces on the client-side.

React’s value proposition is centered around several key features that make it a powerful and popular library for building user interfaces.

---
### Component-Based Architecture

A component is a piece of the UI (user interface) that has its own logic and appearance. A component can be as small as a button, or as large as an entire page.

```
function MyButton() {  

	function handleClick() {  
		alert('You clicked me!');  
	}  

	return (  
		<button onClick={handleClick}>  
			Click me  
		</button>  
	);  

}
```

> **NOTE:** React component names must always start with a capital letter.

You can take a component and use it inside another component, just like you would with regular HTML tags. This enables **reusability** and **clear structure**.

```
function MyApp() {  
	return (  
		<div>  
			<h1>Welcome to my app</h1>  
			<MyButton />  
		</div>  
	);  
}
```

---
### Virtual DOM - (needs work)

When using imperative DOM manipulation APIs, you typically need to make multiple DOM manipulation calls to achieve the desired state changes. Multiple DOM manipulation calls made in quick succession can lead to increased overhead and slower performance.

React optimises the UI update process by employing the concept of the **Virtual DOM**. The Virtual DOM is a lightweight, in-memory representation of the actual DOM. When the state of a component changes, React updates the Virtual DOM first. It then efficiently determines the minimal set of changes needed to update the real DOM, applying these changes in a batch. This approach significantly reduces the overhead and improves performance, ensuring smoother and faster UI updates.

---
### Unidirectional Data Flow

With libraries like `jQuery`, developers had to manually manipulate the DOM to reflect any changes in the data and capture user inputs to update the data.

Frameworks such as `AngularJS`, with its **two-way data binding** greatly simplified the interaction between the UI and the underlying data. If the `model` changes, the `view` gets updated automatically to reflect the change, and vice versa.

<strong><span style="color:red; background: #FFF1E8">However, in complex applications with many interconnected components, it becomes quite challenging to identify the origin of a change and how it might have cascaded through the application.</span></strong>

React leverages the **one-way binding** concept to prioritise a **unidirectional data flow**, ensuring that data flows from top-level components down to lower-level components, but not vice-versa. This means that changes to the state of a component only affect its children and not its parents or siblings.

Unidirectional data flow maintains a clear and predictable data flow, making the application easier to debug and reason about.

---
### Declarative UI

React adopts a **declarative approach** to UI manipulation. This means you describe the different states your UI component can have and design the component's rendering logic to handle these states. 

```
function MyApp(isLoggedIn) { 

	let content;  
	if (isLoggedIn) {  
		content = <AdminPanel />;  
	} else {  
		content = <LoginForm />;  
	}  

	return (  
		<div>  
			{content}  
		</div>  
	);
	
}
```

<strong><span style="color:red; background: #FFF1E8">React automatically takes care of re-rendering the affected parts of the UI whenever the state of your component changes.</span></strong>

This declarative approach simplifies reasoning about how your UI will behave at any given moment, making it easier to maintain and understand.

---
## JSX

JSX is a **syntax extension for JavaScript** that allows us to write HTML-like code within our JavaScript code.

> **NOTE:** JSX is not a separate language, but rather a syntax extension that is transformed into regular JavaScript code by a compiler or transpiler.

---

