
**Authentication** is a crucial aspect of any web application that requires users to sign in and manage their accounts. There are different ways to authenticate users, but the primary methods today are **JWT-based authentication** and **session-based authentication**.

> **NOTE:** Authentication provides a way to associate requests with users.

---
### Session-Based Authentication

**Session-based authentication** is a method of tracking a user's login state by creating a unique session for each authenticated user. 

When a user logs in, the server generates a session ID and stores session information server-side, typically in memory or a database. This session ID is then sent to the client, usually as a cookie, which the client includes with subsequent requests to prove authentication.

Cookies are used since they are sent back to the server with each request. When the server receives the session ID, it can look up the session in the database to both confirm its validity, as well as reference the associated user.

---
### JWT-Based Authentication

**JSON Web Token (JWT) authentication** is an authentication method where a signed, encoded token is generated upon user login and returned to the client.

The JWT contains information such as the user ID, issue date, expiration date, etc. Once verified by the server using a private key, the server can trust that the information within the JWT correctly identifies the party that made the request.

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Unlike session-based authentication, JWTs are self-contained and eliminate the need for server-side session storage.</span>

---

