
There are four authorization models:

- Role-based access control (RBAC)
- Relationship-based access control (ReBAC)
- Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)
- Combining RBAC, ReBAC and ABAC

---
### Role-based access control (RBAC)

The first model is Role-based access control (RBAC). A user is assigned one or more roles. Each role is a collection of permissions, each of which grants the user the ability to perform an operation on one or more resources. The `isAllowed()` operation verifies that the user has a role that grants them permission.

In some applications, a user’s roles are retrieved at login and stored in the session or the session token. In other applications, the user’s roles are stored in the database and retrieved by the authorization logic when needed. Some applications use a combination of both approaches.

---
### Relationship-based access control (ReBAC)

Another authorization model is relationship-based access control (ReBAC). When using ReBAC, access decisions are based on the user’s relationship with the data they are trying to access. For example, in a typical consumer-oriented e-commerce application, such as **Amazon.com**, a customer can view and cancel their own orders. In other words, the `isAllowed()` operation determines whether to grant access based on the relationship between the order and the user.

---
### Attribute-based access control (ABAC)

RBAC and ReBAC are subsets of a more general authorization model, attribute-based access control (ABAC). ABAC uses the attributes of the user, the resource and the environment to determine whether to grant access. For example, the visibility (public vs. private) of Github repository is an example of an attribute that’s used for authorization. If the repository is public, then anyone, even anonymous users, can view it, whereas if it’s private, access is determined by roles and relationships.

---


