
The Open-Closed Principle (OCP) states that <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">"A software should be open for extension but closed for modification"</span>.

The goal is make software entities (classes, modules, functions) resilient. This is good because it allows new features to be added later without changing existing code. 

> **NOTE:** The OCP is one of the driving forces behind the architecture of systems. 

Here's another way to think about this principle: <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">"Take the parts that vary and encapsulate them, so that later you can alter or extend the parts that vary without affecting those that don't"</span>.

Identifying variability and isolating it from stable parts of the code allows for future changes to be implemented through extensions without modifying the core functionality.

**Example: Notification Service**

```
class NotificationService {
    public void sendNotification(String type) {
        if (type.equals("EMAIL")) {
            // send email
        } else if (type.equals("SMS")) {
            // send SMS
        } else if (type.equals("PUSH")) {
            // send push notification
        }
    }
}
```

Every time a new notification type is added, you must modify the `NotificationService` class. Over time, it becomes harder to manage and riskier to update.

---
### How to Apply OCP?

<span style="color:red;">(explore this further) </span>The basic idea is that you should be able to add functionality to a class by extending the class, either using inheritance or composition without having to go in and modify the source code of the class.

Applying the **Open-Closed Principle (OCP)** is essentially a combination of applying **encapsulation** and **abstraction**. The idea is to **abstract the behaviour that stays the same** into a stable interface or base class, and then **encapsulate the parts that change** in separate subclasses or implementations.

**Example: Notification Service**

Let’s apply OCP to `NotificationService` by **abstracting** <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">the specific behaviour of each notification type (i.e., the part that stays the same)</span> into a **common interface**.

```
interface Notification {
    void send();
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Each notification type (i.e., the part that changes)</span> becomes a class that implements this interface:

```
class EmailNotification implements Notification {
    public void send() {
        System.out.println("Sending Email...");
    }
}

class SMSNotification implements Notification {
    public void send() {
        System.out.println("Sending SMS...");
    }
}

class PushNotification implements Notification {
    public void send() {
        System.out.println("Sending Push Notification...");
    }
}
```

**Encapsulate** means you **hide the varying part behind the abstraction**.  Now the `NotificationService` depends only on the `Notification` interface, it **doesn't care** which type of notification it's using:

```
class NotificationService {
    public void sendNotification(Notification notification) {
        notification.send(); // Polymorphism handles the rest
    }
}
```

Now, if you want to add a new notification type like `WhatsAppNotification`, you don’t modify `NotificationService`. You just **create a new class** that implements `Notification`. 

```
class WhatsAppNotification implements Notification {
    public void send() {
        System.out.println("Sending WhatsApp message...");
    }
}
```

> **NOTE:** `NotificationService` remains untouched and works with any `Notification`.

---