
The Interface Segregation Principle (ISP) states that <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">clients should not be forced to depend on methods they do not use</span>. The idea is to define fine-grained interfaces specific to the client that is going to use them.

> **NOTE:** Don’t make a "fat" interface that forces all implementing classes to implement methods they **don’t actually need**.

---
### Design Problems

If an interface has **too many unrelated methods**, classes that implement it may be forced to include empty or unnecessary method implementations. This leads to fragile code, as changes in unrelated parts of the system can impact these classes, <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">breaking the principle of separation of concerns</span>.

**Bad Example: Fat Interface**

```
interface Worker {
    void work();
    void eat();
}
```

Now suppose we have:

```
class HumanWorker implements Worker {
    public void work() /* does work */
    public void eat()  /* eats food */
}

class RobotWorker implements Worker {
    public void work() /* does work */
    public void eat()  /* ??? not needed! */
}
```

`RobotWorker` has to implement `eat()`, even though robots don't eat.

Also, if someone changes or adds methods to a shared interface like this:

```
interface Worker {
    void work();
    void eat();
    void sleep(); // newly added
}
```

Now **all classes** implementing `Worker`, even if they don’t care about `sleep()`, are **forced to change**, compile, and possibly break.

This <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">creates tight coupling (interdependence)</span> between unrelated parts of the system.

> **NOTE:** Statically typed language like Java force programmers to create declaration that users must import. It is these included declarations in source code dependencies that force recompilation and redeployment.

---
### How to Apply ISP?

Separate interfaces based on **cohesive (closely related) behaviour** such that each interface becomes focused on **one specific responsibility**.

**Example**

Break down `Worker` interface into smaller, **role-specific interfaces**:

```
interface Workable { void work(); }
interface Eatable { void eat(); }
interface Sleepable { void sleep(); }
```

Now each class can implement only what it needs:

```
class Robot implements Workable {
    public void work() /* does work */
}
```

> **NOTE:** Respecting **Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)** also helps us to observe the **Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)**.

---
