
**Design Patterns** are proven, reusable solutions to common problems that occur in software design. They provide a **common vocabulary** to structure code, making it easier to understand.

> **NOTE:** **Design Patterns** are not code snippets or libraries but **general templates or best practices** for solving recurring design issues in a structured and efficient way.

---
### Categories of Design Patterns

| Category       | Purpose                               | Example Patterns                    |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **Creational** | Object creation mechanisms            | Singleton, Factory, Builder         |
| **Structural** | How classes / objects are composed    | Adapter, Decorator, Proxy           |
| **Behavioral** | Object interaction and responsibility | Observer, Strategy, Template Method |

---
### How to Learn Design Patterns?

The best way to use patterns is to load your brain with them and then recognize places in your designs and existing applications where you can apply them.

Instead of code reuse, with patterns you get experience reuse.

---
### How to Need Design Patterns in Functional Programming?

Most of the OOP design patterns are irrelevant in functional programming. In many cases, the language itself provides operators that do the same thing that patterns do. 

**It's like design principles are low-level and design patterns are high-level, functional programming is at higher level of abstraction.**

---


- **Creational:** Related to object instantiation, providing a way to decouple the code that creates the object from the object itself.
- **Structural:** Describe how classes and objects are composed to create new structures and functionalities.
- **Behavioral:** Describe how objects or classes should communicate, as well as their responsibilities.

Design patterns 

- Patterns are discovered, not created.

- Behavior can also be encapsulated.

- **Most of the design patterns are about replacing inheritance with composition.**

- One of the biggest problem with software designing to deal with change. Software that is not designed well breaks easily at the first sight of change.

- Patterns can be classified based on scope:

- **Class:**

  - describe how relationship between classes are primarily defined via inheritance.
  - these relationships are defined at compile-time.
  - Interpreter, Factory Method, Adapter and Template Method fall under class design patterns.

- **Object:**

  - describe relationships between objects that are primarilt defined by composition.
  - these relationships are created at runtime and are more dynamic and flexible than the ones defined by inheritance.

---
