
The `@Autowired` annotation is used to automate the dependency injection process. It's a declarative way to instruct Spring to automatically resolve and inject a bean into a class. 

It works on **constructors, fields, and setter methods**.

---
### Field Injection (Least Recommended)

```
@Component
public class NotificationService {

    @Autowired
    private EmailService emailService;

    public void sendNotification(String msg) {
        emailService.sendEmail("test@example.com", msg);
    }
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Disadvantage:</span> Field-injected dependencies are not `final`, meaning they can be modified after the object is created. This makes the class mutable, increasing the risk of unintended side effects during testing or debugging.

---
### Setter Injection

```
@Component
public class NotificationService {

    private EmailService emailService;

    @Autowired
    public void setEmailService(EmailService emailService) {
        this.emailService = emailService;
    }
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Disadvantage:</span> Allows dependencies to be reassigned, increasing the risk of unintended side effects during runtime. This makes the object mutable and less thread-safe.

---
### Constructor Injection (Recommended)

```
@Component
public class NotificationService {

    private final EmailService emailService;

    @Autowired // optional if only one constructor
    public NotificationService(EmailService emailService) {
        this.emailService = emailService;
    }
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Advantage:</span>It promotes immutability, simplifies testing, and ensures that all dependencies are explicitly defined and provided during object creation.

---
### How it Works?

When Spring starts the application:

1. It scans for beans in the context.
2. When it finds an `@Autowired` point, it searches for a bean **by type** (primary method of matching).
3. If exactly one matching bean is found → it gets injected.
4. If multiple matches are found → Spring requires a disambiguation (`@Qualifier` or `@Primary`).
5. If no matching bean is found → Spring throws an error (unless you set `required = false`).

---





