
The **`@RequestParam`** annotation is used to **bind HTTP request parameters** to method parameters in a controller.

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Example</span>

```
@RequestMapping(value = "/greet", method = RequestMethod.GET)
public String greetUser(@RequestParam String name) {
    return "Hello, " + name;
}
```

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Request</span>

```
GET /greet?name=John
```

---
### Optional Parameter with Default Value

You can make parameters **optional** and set a default value.

```
@GetMapping("/greet")
public String greetUser(@RequestParam(required = false, defaultValue = "Guest") 
                        String name) {
    return "Hello, " + name;
}
```

If `name` is not provided:

```
GET /greet
Response: Hello, Guest
```

> **NOTE:** Since Spring assigns the default value directly, you avoid writing extra code to handle `null` or missing values.

---
### Renaming Parameters

If the **parameter name in the request** is different from your method parameter name, you can map it.

```
@PostMapping("/api/user")
public String addUserRename(
        @RequestParam(name = "user_id") int id,
        @RequestParam(name = "full_name") String name) {
    return "User ID: " + id + ", Name: " + name;
}
```

> **NOTE:** It **decouples your internal method variable names from the external API parameter names**, giving you flexibility in both design and maintenance. You can change your internal method parameter names without breaking client requests.

---

<span style="color:red;font-weight:bold;">Q. Is it possible to use</span> `@RequestParam` <span style="color:red;font-weight:bold;">in a</span> `POST` <span style="color:red;font-weight:bold;">request?</span>

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">A.</span> Normally, people associate `@RequestParam` with **GET** requests, but Spring actually allows it in **POST** requests too. The key point is: `@RequestParam` always reads **parameters**, not JSON body.  

Those parameters can come from:

1. **Query Parameters:** If you send parameters in the URL (e.g., `/submit?id=101&name=John`), `@RequestParam` will map them to method parameters.

2. **Form Data (`application/x-www-form-urlencoded`)**: If you submit a form with a `POST` request and `Content-Type` is `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`, `@RequestParam`can still capture the submitted form fields.

---
