
 Flexible Box Layout (`Flexbox`) is a **single-direction layout model** that provides an efficient way to align and distribute space among items (`flex items`) in a container (`flex container`).

> **NOTE:** Think of flex items as primarily laying out either in horizontal rows or vertical columns.

<strong><span style="color: red; background: MistyRose;">The main idea behind flex layout is to give container the ability to alter its items to best fill the available space, allowing us to create responsive layouts that adapt to different screen sizes and orientations.</span></strong>

---

<strong><span style="color: green;">Q. How to make a flex container?</span></strong>

```
.container {
  display: flex;
}
```

 **`display: flex`** - Makes the element a **block-level** flex container (starts on a **new line** and takes up the **full width** of its parent by default).

```
.container {
	display: inline-flex;
}
```

**`display: inline-flex`** - Makes the element an **inline-level** flex container (**stays inline** and only takes up as much **width as its content needs**).

---

<strong><span style="color: green;">Q. You have a flex container with three items. You want the first item to align to the left edge, the last item to align to the right edge, and the middle item to be spaced evenly between them. Which CSS property would you use to achieve this layout?</span></strong>

Use **`justify-content: space-between;`** on the flex container. This value distributes the extra space between the flex items — pushing the first to the start, the last to the end, and evenly spacing any items in between.

```
.container {
  display: flex;
  justify-content: space-between;
}
```

---

<strong><span style="color: green;">Q. You have a horizontal flex container with multiple items of different heights. How can you make sure all items are vertically centered within the container, regardless of their individual height?</span></strong>

Use **`align-items: center;`** on the flex container. This will align all the flex items along the vertical (`cross`) axis, centering them within the container.

```
.container {
  display: flex;
  align-items: center;
}
```

---


