
Data modeling refers to how we organise data in a database into tables and how to relate those tables if we want to join them.

When it comes to data modeling, the **star** and **snowflake** schemas are two common approaches for a warehouse using the **bottom-up Kimball approach**.

> **NOTE:** Schema means to plan or model.

**Star** and **Snowflake** schemas are models for organising our data. These data models denormalise organisational data into **dimensions** and **fact tables**.

---
### Fact Table

A fact table consists of <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">measurements</span> or metrics about an organisational process. These are known as facts. Each row within the table captures a measurement or metric about one process transaction.

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">Example</span>

A fact table used within the **Apple music service** to track **artist albums** might include columns like ArtistID, GenreID, SongLength, and UnitPrice.

Fact tables contain measurements and metrics, which this table has in **song length**, and **unit price**. In addition, the **artist** and **genre ids** can be used to **join dimensional tables to provide more details about the song length or unit prices.**

> **NOTE:** The value of the metrics captured in a fact table should stay the same over time.

---
### Dimension Table

Dimension tables contain attributes and <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;">characteristics</span> that describe the data in the fact table. These characteristics are called dimensions.

The number of rows in a dimension table is typically less than the number of rows in its corresponding fact table.

---
### Star Schema

A star schema is an organisational structure that uses a single fact table and one or more dimensional tables. The central table, surrounded by dimensional tables, somewhat resembles a star. 

The relatively few joins needed for a star schema make queries fast and easy to use by organisational users.

---
### Snowflake Schema

A snowflake schema is similar to a star schema. However, <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold">at least one of the dimensional tables does not directly join the fact table and must be joined through another dimensional table.</span>

---
