
**Spring** started as a lightweight alternative to **Java Enterprise Edition** (**JEE**, **J2EE** as it was known at the time). 

Rather than developing components as heavyweight **Enterprise JavaBeans (EJBs)**, Spring offered a simpler approach to enterprise Java development, utilizing **dependency injection** and **aspect-oriented programming** to achieve the capabilities of EJB with plain old Java objects (POJOs).

While **Spring** was lightweight in terms of component code, it was heavyweight in terms of configuration. Component-scanning reduced configuration and Java configuration made it less awkward, but Spring still required a lot of configuration.

> **NOTE:** Initially, **Spring** was configured with XML. Spring 2.5 introduced **annotation-based component-scanning**, which eliminated a great deal of explicit XML configuration. Spring 3.0 introduced a **Java-based configuration** as a type-safe and refactorable option to XML.

**Dependency management** is another form of friction. Deciding what dependencies (libraries) need to be part of the project build is tricky enough. But it's even more challenging to know which versions of whose libraries will play well with others.

Spring Boot brings a great deal of magic to Spring application development. However, <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">three foundational features of Spring Boot include</span>:

1. <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Auto-Configuration</span>
2. <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Simplified Dependency Management</span>
3. <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Simplified Deployment</span>

---
### Auto-Configuration

**All the configuration represents development friction.** Any time spent writing configuration is time spent not writing application logic. The mental shift required to think about configuring a Spring feature distracts from solving the business problem.

Spring Boot can automatically configure beans based on the libraries present in your application's classpath. For example, if a `JDBC` driver is on the classpath, Spring Boot will auto-configure a `DataSource` bean.

We no longer have to manually configure beans for common functionalities such as database connections or a web server, Spring Boot can do this for us.

> **NOTE:** **Spring Boot** is just **Spring**. Inside, Spring Boot is doing the same kind of bean configuration in Spring that you might do on your own if Spring Boot didn't exist. Thankfully, because Spring Boot does exist, you're freed from dealing with explicit boilerplate configuration and are able to focus on the logic that makes your application unique.

---
### Simplified Dependency Management

It can be challenging to add dependencies to a project's build. Each primary dependency incorporates numerous other secondary dependencies in order to fulfill its promised functionality.

<span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">We often need to think of questions like:</span>
- <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Which version do you need?</span>
- <span style="color:green;font-weight:bold;background:beige;">Will that version play well with other dependencies in the same project?</span>

 **Spring Boot** offers help with project dependency management by way of starter dependencies called **Bills of Materials (BOMs)**. They are built around the proven premise that vast majority of times you provide a particular capability, you do it in nearly the same way, nearly every time. 
 
 For example, each time we build an API, we expose endpoints, listen for requests, process requests, convert to and from objects, exchange information in 1+ standard formats, send and receive data over the wire using a particular protocol, and more. Adding a single starter: `spring-boot-starter-web` provides all of those related functionalities in a **single application dependency.**

> **NOTE:** Spring Boot's starter dependencies free you from worrying about which versions of the libraries you need. All dependencies encompassed by a starter are version-synchronized.

---
### Simplified Deployment

Spring Boot comes with an embedded servlet container (`Tomcat`, `Jetty`, or `Undertow`) that allows us to create web applications as self-executable JAR files that can be run on the command line without deploying applications to a conventional Java application server.

---
